Introduce new PPL commands, configuration and behavior changes (#9790)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/sql/ppl/functions.md

| 5.1 | 3.5 | 1.4 | 0.2 | 1   
| 5.6 | 3.0 | 4.1 | 1.3 | 0
| 6.7 | 2.5 | 5.8 | 1.8 | 2

## join (experimental)

Using `join` command to combines two datasets together. The left side could be an index or results from a piped commands, the right side could be either an index or a subquery.

### Syntax

> ```sql

Reviewer: Why you specify the language as sql?

Author: if remove it, we have to remove all 56 ` ```sql ` in this file, and more in other files.

Reviewer 2: I think we can keep these for now.

| 5.1 | 3.5 | 1.4 | 0.2 | 1   
| 5.6 | 3.0 | 4.1 | 1.3 | 0
| 6.7 | 2.5 | 5.8 | 1.8 | 2

## join

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
{: .warning}

You can combine two datasets using the `join` command. The left side can be an index or results from piped commands, while the right side can be either an index or a subquery.

### Syntax

```sql
[join-type] join [left-alias] [right-alias] on <join-criteria> <right-dataset>
* joinCriteria: mandatory. It could be any comparison expression.
* right-dataset: mandatory. Right dataset could be either an index or a subquery with/without alias.
```

Field | Description | Type | Required | Default
:--- |:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`join-type` | The type of join to perform. Valid values are `inner`, `left`, `right`, `full`, `cross`, `semi`, and `anti`.  | `String` | No   | `inner`

> `left-alias` | The subquery alias to use with the left join side in order to avoid ambiguous naming. Fixed pattern: `left = <left-alias>`    | `String` | No   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`left-alias` | The subquery alias to use with the left join side in order to avoid ambiguous naming. Fixed pattern: `left = <left-alias>`    | `String` | No   | N/A
```

> `right-alias` | The subquery alias to use with the right join side in order to avoid ambiguous naming. Fixed pattern: `right = <right-alias>` | `String` | No   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`right-alias` | The subquery alias to use with the right join side in order to avoid ambiguous naming. Fixed pattern: `right = <right-alias>` | `String` | No   | N/A
```

> `right-alias` | The subquery alias to use with the right join side in order to avoid ambiguous naming. Fixed pattern: `right = <right-alias>` | `String` | No   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`right-alias` | The subquery alias to use with the right join side in order to avoid ambiguous naming. Fixed pattern: `right = <right-alias>` | `String` | No   | N/A
```

`join-criteria` | Any comparison expression.  | `String` | Yes  | -

> `right-dataset` | Either an index or a subquery with/without alias.  | `String` | Yes  | -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`right-dataset` | Either an index or a subquery with/without alias.  | `String` | Yes  | N/A
```

The following examples use the `state_country` and `occupation` indexes:

`state_country`:

> | name  | age | state      | country

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Name  | Age | State   | Country
```

:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
| Jake  | 70  | California | USA
| Hello | 30  | New York   | USA
| John  | 25  | Ontario    | Canada
| Jane  | 20  | Quebec     | Canada
| Jim   | 27  | B.C        | Canada
| Peter | 57  | B.C        | Canada
| Rick  | 70  | B.C        | Canada
| David | 40  | Washington | USA

`occupation`:

> | name  | occupation  | country | salary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Name  | Occupation  | Country | Salary
```

:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
| Jake  | Engineer    | England | 100000
| Hello | Artist      | USA     | 70000
| John  | Doctor      | Canada  | 120000
| David | Doctor      | USA     | 120000
| David | Unemployed  | Canada  | 0
| Jane  | Scientist   | Canada  | 90000

> **Example 1: Two indexes join**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example 1: Join two indexes**
```

The following example performs an inner join between two indexes:

```sql
search source = state_country
| inner join left=a right=b ON a.name = b.name occupation
| stats avg(salary) by span(age, 10) as age_span, b.country
```

> | avg(salary) | age_span | b.country

Reviewer 2: These are meant to be code accurate. It makes sense for the data index above but not necessarily for these tables.

> | avg(salary) | age_span | b.country

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
avg(salary) | age_span | b.country
```

> avg(salary) | age_span | b.country

Reviewer 2: None of the other syntax tables are introduced on the page, but I can start the precedent here and go back and fix the others.

> avg(salary) | age_span | b.country

Reviewer 3: No worries, let's go with consistency.

:--- | :--- | :---
120000.0 | 40 | USA
105000.0 | 20 | Canada
0.0 | 40 | Canada
70000.0 | 30 | USA
100000.0 | 70 | England

**Example 2: Join with subsearch**

The following example performs a left join with a subsearch:

```sql
search source = state_country as a
| where country = 'USA' OR country = 'England'
| left join on a.name = b.name [
    source = occupation
    | where salary > 0
    | fields name, country, salary
    | sort salary
    | head 3
  ] as b
| stats avg(salary) by span(age, 10) as age_span, b.country
```

> | avg(salary) | age_span | b.country

Reviewer 2: These are meant to be case accurate to the code, because identifiers in PPL are case-sensitive.

> | avg(salary) | age_span | b.country

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
avg(salary) | age_span | b.country
```

:--- | :--- | :---
null | 40 | null
70000.0 | 30 | USA
100000.0 | 70 | England

### Limitations

The `join` command works only when `plugins.calcite.enabled` is set to `true`.

## lookup

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).    
{: .warning}

The `lookup` command enriches your search data by adding or replacing data from a lookup index (dimension table). You can extend fields of an index with values from a dimension table, append or replace values when lookup condition is matched. As an alternative to the `join` command, the `lookup` command is more suitable for enriching the source data with a static dataset.

> 

Reviewer 2: @natebower: This should be adjusted now. Let me know if the change works.

### Syntax

```sql
lookup <lookup-index> (<lookup-mapping-field> [as <source-mapping-field>])... [(replace | append) (<input-field> [AS <output-field>])...]
```

Field | Description | Required | Default
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---

> `lookup-index` | The name of lookup index (dimension table). | Yes | -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`lookup-index` | The name of lookup index (dimension table). | Yes | N/A
```

> `lookup-mapping-field`| A mapping key in `lookup-index`, analogous to a `join` key from right table. You can specify multiple `lookup-mapping-field` values with commas. | Yes | -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`lookup-mapping-field`| A mapping key in the `lookup-index`, analogous to a `join` key from the right table. You can specify multiple `lookup-mapping-field` values with commas. | Yes | -
```

> `lookup-mapping-field`| A mapping key in the `lookup-index`, analogous to a `join` key from the right table. You can specify multiple `lookup-mapping-field` values with commas. | Yes | -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`lookup-mapping-field`| A mapping key in the `lookup-index`, analogous to a `join` key from the right table. You can specify multiple `lookup-mapping-field` values with commas. | Yes | N/A
```

> `source-mapping-field`| A mapping key from source (left side), analogous to a `join` key from left side. | No | `lookup-mapping-field`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`source-mapping-field`| A mapping key from the source (left side), analogous to a `join` key from the left side. | No | `lookup-mapping-field`
```

> `replace` \| `append` | The output strategies. If you specify `replace`, matched values in `lookup-index` field overwrite the values in result. If you specify `append`, matched values in `lookup-index` field only append to the missing values in result. | No | `replace`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`replace` \| `append` | The output strategies. When specifying `replace`, matched values in `lookup-index` field overwrite the values in result. If you specify `append`, matched values in `lookup-index` field only append to the missing values in result. | No | `replace`
```

> `input-field` | A field in `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to result output. You can specify multiple `input-field` values with commas. If you don't specify any `input-field`, all fields except `lookup-mapping-field` from `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to result output. | No |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`input-field` | A field in `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. You can specify multiple `input-field` values with commas. If you don't specify any `input-field`, all fields except `lookup-mapping-field` from `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. | No |
```

> `input-field` | A field in `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. You can specify multiple `input-field` values with commas. If you don't specify any `input-field`, all fields except `lookup-mapping-field` from `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. | No |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`input-field` | A field in `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. You can specify multiple `input-field` values with commas. If you don't specify any `input-field`, all fields except `lookup-mapping-field` from `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. | No | N/A
```

> `input-field` | A field in `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. You can specify multiple `input-field` values with commas. If you don't specify any `input-field`, all fields except `lookup-mapping-field` from `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. | No | N/A

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`input-field` | A field in `lookup-index` where matched values are applied to the result output. You can specify multiple `input-field` values with commas. If you don't specify any `input-field`, all fields except `lookup-mapping-field` from `lookup-index` are matched values that are applied to the result output. | No | N/A
```

> `output-field` | A field of output. You can specify zero or multiple `output-field` values. If you specify `output-field` with an existing field name in source query, its values will be replaced or appended by matched values from `input-field`. If the field specified in `output-field` is a new field, an extended new field will be applied to the results. | No | `input-field`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`output-field` | A field of output. You can specify zero or multiple `output-field` values. If you specify `output-field` with an existing field name in the source query, its values will be replaced or appended by the matched values from `input-field`. If the field specified in `output-field` is a new field, an extended new field will be applied to the results. | No | `input-field`
```

The following examples use the `workers` and `work_information` indexes.

`workers`:

> | id | name | occupation | country | salary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| ID | Name | Occupation | Country | Salary
```

:--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :---
| 1000 | Jake | Engineer | England | 100000
| 1001 | Hello | Artist | USA | 70000
| 1002 | John | Doctor | Canada | 120000

> | 1003 | David | Doctor | - | 120000

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 1003 | David | Doctor | N/A | 120000
```

> | 1004 | David | - | Canada | 0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 1004 | David | N/A | Canada | 0
```

| 1005 | Jane | Scientist | Canada | 90000

`work_information`:

> | uid | name  | department | occupation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| UID | Name  | Department | Occupation
```

:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
| 1000 | Jake  | IT | Engineer |
| 1002 | John  | DATA | Scientist |
| 1003 | David | HR | Doctor |
| 1005 | Jane  | DATA | Engineer |
| 1006 | Tom   | SALES | Artist |

**Example 1: Lookup workers and return the corresponding department**

The following example looks up workers and returns the corresponding department:

```sql
source = workers | lookup work_information uid as id append department
```

> | id | name | occupation | country | salary | department

Reviewer 2: These are meant to be case accurate to the code, because identifiers in PPL are case-sensitive.

:--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :---
1000 | Jake | Engineer | England | 100000 | IT

> 1001 | Hello | Artist | USA | 70000 | null

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1001 | Hello | Artist | USA | 70000 | Null
```

1002 | John | Doctor | Canada | 120000 | DATA
1003 | David | Doctor | null | 120000 | HR

> 1004 | David | null | Canada | 0 | null

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1004 | David | Null | Canada | 0 | Null
```

1005 | Jane | Scientist | Canada | 90000 | DATA

> **Example 2: Look up workers and replace occupation and department**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example 2: Look up workers and replace their occupation and department**
```

> The following example looks up workers and replaces occupation and department from work_information:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example looks up workers and replaces the occupation and department using their `work_information`:
```

> The following example looks up workers and replaces the occupation and department using their `work_information`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example looks up workers and replaces their occupation and department using their `work_information`:
```

```sql
source = workers | lookup work_information uid as id, name
```

> | id | name | occupation | country | salary | department

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
id | name | occupation | country | salary | department
```

:--- | :--- |:-----------| :--- | :--- | :---

> 1000 | Jake | Engineer   | England | 100000 | IT

Reviewer 3: Whole table: Null capitalized

1001 | Hello | null       | USA | 70000 | null
1002 | John | Scientist  | Canada | 120000 | DATA
1003 | David | Doctor     | null | 120000 | HR
1004 | David | null       | Canada | 0 | null
1005 | Jane | Engineer  | Canada | 90000 | DATA

> **Example 3: Lookup workers and create a new occupation field**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Example 3: Look up workers and create a new occupation field**
```

> The following example looks up workers and appends occupation from work_information as a new field:

Reviewer 3: Rewrite this please.

> The following example looks up workers and appends occupation from work_information as a new field:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example looks up workers and appends their occupation from `work_information` as a new field:
```

```sql
source = workers | lookup work_information name replace occupation as new_occupation
```

> | id | name | occupation | country | salary | new_occupation

Reviewer 3: Please correct the capitalization and capitalize "Null" in the table.

Reviewer 2: These are meant to be case accurate to the code, because identifiers in PPL are case-sensitive.

> | id | name | occupation | country | salary | new_occupation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
id | name | occupation | country | salary | new_occupation
```
